### Megatron-Core

Megatron-Core is a newly released open-source PyTorch-based library that further expands the collections of GPU optimized techniques inherited from Megatron-LM with more cutting-edge innovations on system-level optimizations. It abstracts them into composable and modular APIs, allowing full flexibility for developers and model researchers to train custom transformers at-scale on NVIDIA accelerated computing infrastructure. This library is compatible with all NVIDIA Tensor Core GPUs, including FP8 acceleration support for NVIDIA Hopper architectures.

Megatron-Core offers the core building blocks such as attention mechanisms, transformer blocks and layers, normalization layers, and embedding techniques. Additional functionality like activation recomputation, distributed checkpointing is also natively built-in to the library. The building blocks and functionality are all GPU optimized, and can be built with advanced parallelization strategies for optimal training speed and stability on NVIDIA Accelerated Computing Infrastructure. Another key component of the Megatron-Core library includes advanced model parallelism techniques (tensor, sequence, and pipeline). Currently, popular LLM model architectures based on Decoder (ex. GPT, Llama), Encoder (ex. BERT), Encoder-Decoder (ex. T5), Retrieval Enhanced Transformers (ex. RETRO), and Mixture of Experts (MoE) can easily be built with performance and efficiency at large compute scales. Developers can also use Megatron-Core's transformer blocks and functional APIs to build their own custom layers.

To get started with megatron core [click here](https://docs.nvidia.com/megatron-core/developer-guide/latest/index.html)
